Citation: 2012 TCC 101

Date: 20120330

Docket: 2004-474(IT)G

BETWEEN:

GEOFFREY BAILEY,

Appellant,

and

HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN,

Respondent.

Docket: 2004-1225(IT)G

AND BETWEEN:

FRANCIS O’DEA,

Appellant,

and

HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN,

Respondent.

Docket: 2004-1226(IT)G

AND BETWEEN:

SEAN O’DEA,

Appellant,

and

HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN,

Respondent.

Docket: 2004-1227(IT)G

AND BETWEEN:

JOHN RANKIN,

Appellant,

and

HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN,

Respondent.

REASONS RESPECTING SUBMISSIONS ON COSTS

Campbell J.

[1] These appeals dealt with the treatment of losses claimed by the Appellants as a consequence of their status as limited partners of the Proshred Florida Georgia Limited Partnership. The issues were essentially the same for all four appeals.

However, the appeal of Geoffrey Bailey also raised the issue of his losses in respect to the Kilrush Limited Partnership while the appeals of Francis and Sean O’Dea involved the additional issue of the imposition of gross negligence penalties. All four appeals were heard together on common evidence. A further eight appeals were held in abeyance pending the hearing of the four appeals.

[2] My Reasons for Judgment were issued on June 1, 2009. The Respondent was substantially, although not wholly, successful. My Order contained a direction to the parties that if they were unable to reach a settlement on the issue of costs within 60 days of my Reasons, they were to contact the Court to obtain dates for the filing of written submissions. The paragraph containing that directive read as follows:

If the parties cannot settle the issue of costs within 60 days of the date of the within Reasons, they may contact the Court to obtain dates for the filing of written submissions.

[3] Almost three years from the date of my Reasons and after three attempts to get a Bill of Costs correct, the Respondent made a request to the Court to file written submissions in respect to the issue of costs. A summary of the events that occurred since my Order issued in June, 2009 demonstrates the unnecessary and unreasonable delays by the Respondent in this matter.

[4] On June 23, 2009, the Appellants’ Counsel received the first proposed Bill of Costs, prepared in accordance with Schedule II, Tariff B (the “Tariff”) of the Tax Court of Canada Rules (General Procedure) (the “Rules”). This Bill of Costs reflected one set of costs for all the appeals together with disbursements incurred. This Bill of Costs listed total fees at $9,200.00 and disbursements at $1,905.19 for a total of $11,105.19. An amount of $525.00 in respect to a possible taxation of costs was added to $11,105.19, for a final total of $11,630.19.

[5] On July 7, 2009, the Appellants requested supporting documentation for some of the disbursements contained in this Bill of Costs.

[6] On July 9, 2009, the Respondent submitted its second Bill of Costs, revised primarily to reflect further amounts claimed for fees, respecting examinations for discovery, and for disbursements for court reporter’s fees. The total revised amount of this Bill of Costs for fees and disbursements had now increased to $13,048.67 from the $11,105.19 total on the first Bill of Costs. Again, the Respondent added an amount of $525.00 for taxation of costs, bringing the total amount of this second Bill of Costs to $13,573.67.

[7] There was no further correspondence between the parties for a two year period.

[8] In the interim, two of the Appellants, Sean O’Dea and Francis O’Dea, on March 17, 2010 and July 8, 1010 respectively, filed Notices of Intention to Make a Proposal under the Bankruptcy and Insolvency Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. B-3, listing the Canada Revenue Agency (the “CRA”) as one of the creditors.

[9] On July 29, 2011, after a two year hiatus, the Respondent again made a third attempt at getting the correct figures into its Bill of Costs. This revised Bill of Costs, according to paragraph 5 of the Respondent’s written submissions,

… largely reflects cost of one appeal under Class C of the Tariff: the exception is that the respondent seeks its costs for services of counsel prior to an examination for discovery for each of the Bailey, Rankin and O’Dea appeals”. …

The total fees and disbursements, over two years later, had now increased from $13,048.67 to $17,496.51. This reflected an increase in fees for services related to the examinations for discovery and the hearing but also reflected a reduction in the disbursements. The final amount of this third Bill was $18,196.51 which reflected an additional amount of $700.00 for a taxation of costs.

[10] On October 13, 2011, the Respondent wrote to the Court requesting that the matter be set down for a taxation of costs.

[11] On October 28, 2011, the Court wrote to the parties advising that, since my Order had made no award of costs to the Respondent, no action respecting a taxation of costs in the matter could be taken.

[12] On November 4, 2011, the Respondent wrote to the Court requesting dates for the filing of submissions in regard to costs. On November 30, 2011, Counsel for the Appellants wrote to the Court advising the following: that her firm took instructions from the two bankrupt Appellants on behalf of the group of investors during the hearing of the appeals; that she had advised the Respondent that the O’Deas were making a proposal in bankruptcy; that to her recollection no further communication occurred, after this communication, until the summer of 2011; and that, since the O’Deas were no longer in a position to provide her with instructions on behalf of the investors, her firm was no longer engaged on behalf of the Appellants to make submissions on costs.

[13] On December 22, 2011, the Court wrote to the parties directing them to file written submissions and advising Counsel for the Appellants that, if she were no longer acting for the Appellants, she would be required to remove herself as counsel of record pursuant to section 33 of the Rules.

[14] By letter dated January 12, 2012 to the Court, the Appellants’ Counsel advised that Geoffrey Bailey and John Rankin had retained her to make submissions on their behalf in respect to the issue of costs and that she would therefore be remaining as counsel of record for all of the taxpayers affected by my Reasons of June 1, 2009 in these appeals.

[15] According to the Appellants’ written submissions dated January 31, 2012, they would be unfairly prejudiced if I awarded any costs to the Respondent in these circumstances. Alternatively, if I did award costs, the Appellants submit that those costs should be reduced and should not be awarded on a joint and several basis.

[16] The Respondent submits that I should award costs according to the Tariff and the third revised Bill of Costs and that the liability should be on a joint and several basis among the Appellants because the main issue in the appeals was the same for all of the Appellants.

[17] Section 147 of the Rules gives the Court wide discretionary powers in awarding costs. When exercising its discretion, the Court may consider one or more of the items listed in Rule 147(3).

[18] The Respondent relies upon a number of those factors set out in Rule 147(3) to establish its claim for costs, including:

(a) it was substantially successful;

(b) the amounts were significant;

(c) the significant volume of work involved;

(d) the appeals involved a complex series of transactions and an assessment made outside the normal reassessment period; and

(e) the Appellants made a settlement offer on terms that were less favourable to the Respondent than the Court decision.

[19] The Court may fix the costs with or without reference to the Tariff and award a lump sum in lieu of or in addition to any taxed costs (Rule 147(4)). The Respondent seeks costs that are largely in accordance with the Tariff amount based on one appeal. According to established caselaw, absent special circumstances that are justified by the application of the factors listed in Rule 147(3), the Court will generally award costs in compliance with the Tariff. Awarding costs above the Tariff is justified where exceptional circumstances exist (Rule 147(4) and Continental Bank of Canada v The Queen, [1994] T.C.J. No. 863). Those special circumstances that dictate a departure from the normal course include misconduct of one of the parties, undue delay, inappropriate prolongation of a proceeding and unnecessary procedural wrangling. Much of the caselaw addresses the discretionary powers of this Court in awarding costs above the Tariff. The Court can apply those same exceptional circumstances equally to support an award of costs substantially below the Tariff or to support not awarding costs at all.

[20] There is an exceptional and unwarranted delay on the Respondent’s part in addressing my direction on costs. This matter never reached the stage of quantification of an award of costs until over two and one-half years subsequent to my Reasons, when the Respondent finally requested dates to provide written submissions on costs. Furthermore, although I requested an explanation from the Respondent for this delay, I was provided with none. The rather surprising response from the Respondent was:

We did not read this to mean that the parties were required to communicate with the Court within those 60 days, but that we were permitted to contact the [C]ourt regarding written submissions following those sixty days.

(Respondent’s correspondence to this Court dated December 14, 2011)

[21] My Order is clear. The parties had 60 days from its date to resolve the issue of costs and, if they were unable to do so, one or both would apply to the Court to obtain dates to file written submissions on the issue. This did not mean two to three years down the road or perhaps, as the Respondent might interpret it, potentially six to nine years down the road. It meant within a reasonable time after the sixty day period had expired, when the details of the appeals are fresh and when the appeals can be concluded in an expeditious manner for all concerned. The Respondent provided no explanation for the two-year delay between its submission to the Appellants of the second revised Bill of Costs and its submission of the third revised Bill of Costs. In fact, according to the Appellants’ Counsel, the Respondent never communicated with her during this time period and it appears from the documentation put before me that there was absolutely no action whatsoever by the Respondent during this period. Nor does it appear that the Respondent actively pursued any potential recovery through the O’Deas’ bankruptcy proceedings. I infer this from the Respondent’s omission to address it. Consequently, I cannot infer that the inordinate delay resulted wholly or in part from efforts to resolve the costs issue.

[22] Where a prolonged and inexcusable delay in complying with an Order within a reasonable period exists and no reasonable explanation is provided, then that party runs the risk of having this Court refuse to award and fix costs in the matter. The Appellants’ Counsel referred me to several cases that addressed the issue of delay and costs (Urbandale Realty Corp. v The Queen, [2008] F.C.J. No. 910, Xerox Canada Inc. v Sweany, [1990] B.C.J. No. 1234, 407 ETR Concession Co. v Ontario (Minister of Transportation), [2005] O.J. No. 1630). These decisions suggest that a Court may consider an unjustified delay in exercising its discretion in awarding costs. However, those decisions, as well as the more recent decision in Whistler (Municipality) v Miller, 2009 B.C.S.C. 419, state that, unless the paying party (the Appellants in this matter) is able to demonstrate the precise nature of the prejudice that has resulted from the delay, the undue delay itself will not bar an award of costs although it will be considered in possibly reducing the quantum of costs.

[23] The Appellants submit that it would unfairly prejudice them if I award costs to the Respondent for the following reasons: the decision was rendered over two and one-half years ago; the Respondent provided no reason for this delay; and further potential financial hardship could result for the two bankrupt Appellants. Although the Appellants may have suffered prejudice, none of these reasons directly address the nature of the prejudice claimed. If the Appellants had established the particulars of the prejudice they claimed to have suffered, I would have awarded no costs to the Respondent.

[24] These are experienced counsel who, between the two of them, should have produced a correct Bill of Costs in the first instance. In these circumstances, I am allowing costs based on the Respondent’s first Bill of Costs that was submitted to the Appellants’ Counsel on June 23, 2009. However, I am reducing the amount of total fees and disbursements as reflected on this first Bill of Costs by one-third and apportioning the balance severally among the Appellants rather than on a joint and several basis of liability. Fixing an amount for an award of costs will avoid the expense associated with a taxation of costs and expedite a conclusion to the entire matter. The total fees and disbursements of $11,105.19 will therefore be reduced by the amount of $3,701.73 and the resulting balance of $7,403.46 will be divided four ways, with the four Appellants being individually responsible for the amount of $1,850.86 in costs.

[25] I have based this award of costs on the first Bill of Costs and reduced it by one-third to compensate for the inordinate and unexplained delays occasioned solely by the Respondent. The Respondent made three attempts at a Bill of Costs over a period in excess of two years before arriving at final figures for fees and disbursements. Between the second and third revised Bill of Costs, two of the Appellants filed notices in bankruptcy. The Respondent inexplicably waited yet another one-year period after the second notice in bankruptcy was filed before initiating any action in this matter. The bungling continued when the Respondent chose, procedurally and incorrectly, to pursue a taxation of costs instead of following the directions contained in my Order and applying to the Court for dates for written submissions. In addition, it would appear from the submissions before me that the Respondent did not pursue its rights as a creditor under the bankruptcy proceedings although duly notified both within the documentation and by the Appellants’ Counsel. The Respondent breached its duty to act fairly and responsibly in bringing this issue to a timely conclusion. The Respondent’s approach and actions were neither diligent nor reasonable in the circumstances and prevented the paying parties, for a period in excess of two and one-half years, from knowing exactly where they stood. I apportioned the liability on a several basis because not all of the issues in these appeals were common to all of the Appellants and, in addition, it remains unclear whether the Respondent participated in the bankruptcy proceedings.

[26] Each Appellant is responsible for payment of his share in the amount of $1,850.86, to be paid within 30 days of the date of these Reasons.

Signed at Ottawa, Canada, this 30th day of March 2012.

“Diane Campbell”

Campbell J.

CITATION:

2010 TCC 101

COURT FILE NOS.:

2004-474(IT)G; 2004-1225(IT)G

2004-1226(IT)G; 2004-1227(IT)G

STYLES OF CAUSE:

Geoffrey Bailey,

Francis O’Dea,

Sean O’Dea,

John Rankin,

and Her Majesty the Queen

PLACE OF HEARING:

Toronto, Ontario

REASONS RESPECTING SUBMISSIONS ON COSTS:

The Honourable Justice Diane Campbell

DATE OF JUDGMENT:

DATE OF REASONS RESPECTING SUBMISSIONS ON COSTS:

June 1, 2009

March 30, 2012

SUBMISSIONS:

Counsel for the Appellant:

Louise R. Summerhill

Counsel for the Respondent:

Brent E. Cuddy

COUNSEL OF RECORD:

For the Appellant:

Name:

Louise R. Summerhill

Firm:

Aird & Berlis LLP

Toronto, Ontario

For the Respondent:

Myles J. Kirvan.

Deputy Attorney General of Canada

Ottawa, Canada

