Date: 19991216

Docket: 97-1391-IT-G

BETWEEN:

CHRISTOPHER DeGEER,

Appellant,

and

HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN,

Respondent.

Reasons for Judgment

Bell, J.T.C.C.

GENERAL:

[1] References to section numbers relate to the Income Tax Act ("Act") unless otherwise stated.

ISSUES:

[2] The issues in this appeal are:

(1) Whether the Appellant suffered a capital loss in the amount of $800,000 in his 1992 taxation year producing an allowable capital loss of $600,000 which can be carried forward to his 1993 and 1994 taxation years to be applied against capital gains realized in those years, and

(2) Whether the Minister of National Revenue ("Minister") properly assessed the Appellant for penalties pursuant to subsection 163(2) of the Income Tax Act for his 1993 and 1994 taxation years.

[3] Although the Appellant filed a Notice of Appeal in respect of his 1992, 1993 and 1994 taxation years, the Appellant appears to have filed Notices of Objection for 1993 and 1994 only.[1]. At the hearing, the Appellant did not comment on the Respondent's allegations in the Reply to the Notice of Appeal that the Appellant was not challenging the amount of tax, interest or penalty assessed for the 1992 taxation year and further that no Notice of Loss Determination for that year had been issued. This pleading suggests that tax was assessed for 1992 and also that no tax was assessed. Obviously this cannot be the case. The documents filed with the Court are of little assistance. Since no evidence of a Notice of Objection having been filed for 1992 was adduced, the purported Notice of Appeal for 1992 will be quashed.

FACTS:

Acquisition of farm from parents

[4] The Appellant is a lawyer and has been a member of the Law Society of Upper Canada since 1987. An Agreement of Purchase and Sale dated April 15, 1989 provides for the purchase of 87 acres of farmland and buildings ("farm") by the Appellant from his step-father and mother, John Alan Watson and Audrey Eileen Watson for $1,300,000 The Appellant presented no expert evidence as to the value of the farm at the date of that purchase.[2] That document provided that the down payment of $25,000 was to be made by cash or certified cheque with a promissory note for the balance. The Appellant testified that $950,000 of the purchase price was allocable to land and $350,000 to the house on that land. He said that his parents declined the $25,000 cash payment and that he made and delivered to them a promissory note for $1,275,000. He testified that that promissory note was lost and that his parents made an affidavit dated June 15, 1990 stating that the "aforesaid Promissory Note can no longer be located in the hands of the undersigned". The Appellant said:

I had them swear an affidavit so that each of my sisters wouldn't show up with an original.

That affidavit stated, in part, that:

The replacement promissory note in the amount of $1,275,000 Canadian has been requested as a replacement of, is intended to be in lieu of, and not in addition to, the first promissory note.

[5] A copy of this replacement note was produced in evidence. Under it, the Appellant promised to pay the above sum

... jointly and severally to John Alan Watson and Audrey Eileen Watson ...

It contains the provision that:

One-half of the aforementioned amount shall be payable to the survivor, if any, of John Alan Watson and Audrey Eileen Watson upon the death of either John Alan Watson or Audrey Eileen Watson.

The entire amount or, if applicable, the balance of the entire amount, shall in any event be paid to John Alan Watson or Audrey Eileen Watson, or either of the estates thereof or, if applicable, the estate of the survivor referred to above on or before December 31, 1999.

The note contained no provision for interest. No security for its payment was given. No payment thereon had been made at the time of the hearing.

[6] The Appellant's parents have resided on the farm continuously since the time of transfer.

[7] The aforesaid transfer was not registered in the appropriate Land Registry Office because the Appellant did not wish to pay land transfer tax. The Appellant's parents used their lifetime capital gains exemption for qualified farm property permitted under the Act, the result of which was that no income tax was payable by them on the sale. The Appellant admitted on cross-examination that he knew there was a lifetime capital gains exemption for his parents of $500,000. That was followed, on cross-examination, by this exchange:

Q. So that the available exemption to both of your parents collectively was, roughly, the amount that you attributed to the value of the farm property absent the house residential portion, correct?

A. Coincidentally the value of the property.

[8] After extensive cross-examination respecting the value of the promissory note the transcript reads:

A. My parents granted me favourable terms because I was their son, favourable terms in the form of a note but not in price.

Q. That may be a perfectly satisfactory explanation of why that was. But do you not agree that there is a difference, a substantial difference in value between $1.3 million in cash and $1.3 million to be paid in ten years and with no interest owing on that note. Isn't that the case?

A. Yes.

[9] The Appellant then went on to spar with Respondent's counsel respecting the valuation, ending with this exchange:

Q. Yes, so what you gave to your parents and what you consider to be fair and full value for this farm was less than $1.3 million, isn't that true?

A. No.

[10] On cross-examination the Appellant said that the allocation of the purchase price, namely $950,000 for land and $350,000 for the house, did not appear in the agreement of purchase and sale.

[11] The Appellant and John Alan Watson signed a Partnership Agreement dated May 6, 1989 for conduct of the farming business on the farm. The Appellant, in subsequent taxation years, deducted restricted farm losses on the basis of such partnership. That partnership was registered with the Ministry of Consumer & Commercial Relations on June 28, 1989.

[12] The Appellant and his parents executed a Nominee Agreement expressed to be made as of the 11th day of August, 1990. That document provided that the farm would continue to be registered in the name of John Alan Watson and Audrey Eileen Watson who would hold the lands on behalf of the Appellant. It provided that no supplement, modification or waiver thereof would be binding unless executed in writing by all parties. Such agreement has never been varied or cancelled.

[13] The Appellant described the area at Bracebridge, Ontario where the farm was located as being a "hotbed of development activity". He stated that the transfer had the advantage of locking in some value and that it was his intent to develop that land in about ten years. Specifically, he said:

My guess was that the land would be ten years developing and so the promissory note was not due until the end of 1999. It was thought at that time that there would then be some cash flow from the sale of lots.

[14] The Appellant wrote a letter in December, 1989 to the Ministry of Agriculture & Food advising that he was the new owner of the farm. By letter of February 15, 1990 he advised the Regional Assessment Commissioner that he was the owner of the farm and that he had declined to register the Deed asserting no concern about a fraudulent Deed being registered because the legal title was in the name of his parents. He advised further, in this letter, that he was disinclined to pay an approximate Land Transfer Tax of $20,000 for protection against an unlikely event. The Appellant wrote a letter dated January 23, 1991 to Canada Post Corporation giving them a mailing address. He said that he put his name on the mail box at the farm.

[15] The Appellant testified at some length about transferring the farm to his parents in order to "creditor-proof" himself because he expected to become a partner in a Toronto law firm and did not want his assets exposed to partnership joint and several liability. He said that the members of the law firm he had joined "were very aggressive lawyers taking high risks in their practices". He also spoke of discussions he had had with a senior partner of that law firm about "credit-proofing". He stated that he had approached his parents about his creditor-proofing and that

... I was getting rid of all of my properties and they were aware that it was because I had been asked ... well, asked , I was told I was going to be asked to be a partner at Meighen & Demers and so I went to my parents and said that I was getting rid of all of my properties and in respect of the farm I wanted to give it to them, that the other properties would be given to Dina, my wife.

Transfer of farm back to parents

[16] A document entitled "Transfer/Deed of Land" dated August 15, 1992 bearing the signature of the Appellant as transferor and the signature of his wife, Dina DeGeer ("Dina") as consenting spouse, provided for the transfer of the farm to the Appellant's parents as joint tenants in consideration of natural love and affection and $1.00. As was the case with the previous document, this Deed was not registered. No reduction in the outstanding debt of $1,300,000 owing by the Appellant to his parents was made. The Appellant testified that his wife shortly thereafter became very angry because she would not be entitled to the property if he died. He also testified that he told his mother, when he alone visited her at the farm, about the deterioration in his marital relationship because of his wife's anger about the transfer of the farm to his parents. He then said:

Sometime, it was either that week or the following week, but my mother phoned me in Toronto and she said to me that that was a very nice gesture but she's talked to Al, my step-father, about it and it's not that important to him to own the land and if it would make Dina happy, she would be happy to return it. And I was quite relieved to hear the offer. My response was, "well, I'll make the proposal to Dina and ... which I did. That evening I just said to her, "Look, Mom says if what you want is the farm back she and Al are prepared to do it". And she just said to me, "Well do it". So thereafter I drafted up yet another transfer of land ... and on the next occasion I went up to the farm, which was the week-end after I typed up the document, my parents executed it... Now that's five weeks to the day after my original disposition to them and that was done. I took the Deed home, I showed my wife and she was satisfied.

[17] A Partnership Amendment Agreement signed by John Alan Watson and the Appellant dated August 22, 1992 provided that the farm would be made available for the use of the partnership for no consideration.

[18] The Appellant testified that in April, 1991 he and his wife bought raw land on a lake in Muskoka and began building "a house as a cottage". He stated further that in September, 1991 they purchased a home in Etobicoke.

[19] On cross-examination the Appellant acknowledged that he had not done any development work on the farm even as at the date of trial and that he had made no overtures to town authorities respecting zoning, et cetera.

[20] The Appellant, in his 1992 income tax return, claimed a capital loss of $800,000 on the transfer of the farm to his parents giving rise to an allowable capital loss of $600,000.

Transfer of farm from parents to Appellant

[21] Thirty-five days after the transfer of the farm to his parents, another document entitled "Transfer/Deed of Land" bearing date September 19, 1992 provided for the conveyance of the farm from the Appellant's parents to the Appellant in consideration of natural love and affection and $1.00. This document was not registered. A Partnership Amendment Agreement, undated, provided that the Partnership Agreement would read as originally executed.

[22] The Appellant described his attempt to obtain a valuation of the Etobicoke home from a realtor. He stated that the realtor was very angry when she learned that he was not listing the house for sale but was simply attempting to obtain a valuation. He gave no evidence respecting engaging or attempting to engage the services of a qualified appraiser.

[23] The Appellant testified that in October, 1992, he was advised that he would not be made a partner and, therefore, did not continue the process of disposing of his properties because there was no longer any need to do so, he having determined to become a sole practitioner.

[24] The Appellant said that following the winter of 1992 and 1993:

... I guess in respect of my wife's concerns or my wife's behaviour, my mother approached me some time in the winter and I have ... I characterized the exchange at discoveries as not being solicitor-client privilege but more in the nature of a mother asking her son or a creditor asking her debtor because the Crown seemed very adamant about knowing how this document[3] .. came about. My mother came to me and said, "what if you die?" just as my wife had been concerned. "What if you die, how do we get paid on the note?" And I said, "well, my estate would owe you the note" and she said "well, how would they pay us?" I said, "well, it settles up all the estate's property and pays off the liabilities to the extent that it can". And my mother asked me, "who does that?". I said, "my executor". She said, "who would that be?". I said, "probably Dina".

[25] He then continued to discuss this matter resulting in his mother saying that she would like a collateral charge and this resulted in a document entitled "Charge/Mortgage of Land" dated in May, 1993 which provided:

This Charge is granted as collateral security to a promissory note from the Chargor to the Chargees dated the 15th day of June, 1989.

The Chargees were his parents.

[26] An exchange, in respect of the capital loss on cross-examination follows:

Q. I am suggesting that the two transactions of 1992 were designed to crystallize a loss in your hands so that you might benefit from those cystallized losses. That's what happened isn't it Mr. DeGeer?

A. I was aware that the effect of the transfer would crystallize a loss.

Capital gains against which Appellant set off

allowable capital loss on sale of farm to parents

[27] Dina was employed by Trimark Financial Corporation ("Trimark"). Prior to the initial public offering of Trimark shares, Dina, as a senior employee, was entitled to purchase certain shares of the company. In order to own the shares equally with the Appellant without registering any of the shares in the name of the Appellant, Dina executed Declaration of Trust No. 1 wherein she declared that 35,000 common shares of Trimark registered in her name were held in trust for the Appellant. This document, which is undated, states that she had held 35,000 common shares for the Appellant since March 31, 1992. The Appellant said that Dina did not want his name to appear on the share register because her employer would not like it.

[28] Another undated document, Declaration of Trust No. 2, provides that Dina had held an option to purchase 50,000 shares of Trimark for the Appellant since April 9, 1992. A document entitled Variation of Trust Agreement dated April 21, 1993 provided that Dina, as trustee, granted to the Appellant the right to veto any proposed exercise by her of her rights pursuant to her legal ownership of the aforesaid option. That is accompanied by a declaration described as being sworn before the Appellant, dated December 21, 1992 in which Franco Balestra, a brother of Dina, says that:

... my sister, Dina DeGeer, declared before me that she held certain of her share securities in Trimark Financial Corporation in trust for her husband, Christopher DeGeer.

Although my sister asked me to remember her declaration, I no longer recall the exact date thereof.

I make this declaration to establish evidence of her trust intention to the best of my current recollection, and for no other or improper purpose.

[29] On cross-examination the Appellant said that Trust Document No. 1 would have been made in the winter of 1992. He said that there was no date on either document and then:

Q. Do you know whether these two documents were created on the same date or different dates?

A. No, I don't remember.

[30] A document entitled "Trust Sale Agreement" expressed to be made on the 12th day of May, 1993 provided for a sale by the Appellant to Dina of 99 percent of the Appellant's right under Declaration of Trust No. 2. The consideration for this was determined by a complex formula.

[31] The Appellant admitted that the Trimark shares were being held for him as of March 31, 1992. He also acknowledged that he didn't take any steps with respect to these shares to put them beyond the reach of creditors.

[32] With respect to the trust agreement and the Appellant's brother-in-law's recollection of an oral declaration of trust, on cross-examination the following exchange took place:

Q. You used the word "important" in your evidence, Mr. DeGeer, correct?

A. I think it is important if you're claiming there is a trust in existence to be able to prove it.

Q. And it is interesting to me, Mr. DeGeer, and perhaps you can tell His Honour why it was, given your inclination to paper most of your transactions, that you chose not to paper that transaction and at the same time chose to ask a witness to remember it?

A. Because on that date, I believe I explained yesterday, on that date Dina was aware of what the fair market value of the shares which was the subject matter of the trust were. And so we were doing it as of that date. But I didn't have -- I guess I didn't have the documents prepared on that date and they were prepared later. Those are the undated ones you went on about yesterday.

[33] Further cross-examination established that Dina disposed of the option to the Appellant at the same value at which she acquired it. This was followed by an exchange relating to the capital gain:

Q. All right, but she paid no tax on that and you were desirous of, to use your language of yesterday, of triggering a gain in your hands. Isn't that true?

A. Of triggering it?

Q. Yes.

A. No.

Q. Well, that was your language Mr. DeGeer.

A. To trigger a gain?

Q. The record will reflect that that is exactly the words you used. You wished to trigger a gain. And the reason you wished to trigger a gain is because you knew that you had the losses, which are the subject of this hearing, available for you, isn't that true Mr. DeGeer?

A. No, no, no. That is not quite the exact statement. You trigger the disposition because you want the money. Attendant to that disposition may or may not be gains. In this case, I was aware there were gains.

Q. That is why it was of interest to me that you used that language yesterday, triggered the gain, because it does show, I suggest Mr. DeGeer, that you recognize and plan and think about and anticipate the tax issues associated with your business dealings, isn't that true?

A. That is a fair statement. I try and consider all matters.

Q. And one of the matters you were considering at the time that you entered into this transaction on May 12, 1993 was that you hoped the Department of National Revenue would recognize it as a capital loss from the preceding year, correct? You had an opportunity to apply that loss against the gain that you were triggering on May 12, 1993 correct?

A. I was aware I had a capital loss at this date and I was aware that if I recognized gains, triggered gains, as you say, that they would relate to each other in my tax return yes.

Q. Yes. So you expected that, through this mechanism, you would access the inherent value of the shares or the trust?

A. Yes.

Q. And you would not pay tax on it nor would your wife pay tax on it, correct?

A. Not through the mechanism, no. This mechanism was the means by which Dina would dispose of them.

[34] Later in cross-examination, it was demonstrated that on examination for discovery the Appellant made no mention of "creditor-proofing" himself as a reason for transferring the farm to his parents.

[35] Further, when asked by Respondent's counsel whether his wife was present during discussions in which the subject of the return of the farm to his parents was raised he responded:

I don't remember.

[36] He then said that it was possible that she was present because she was often up north with him.

[37] On further cross-examination the Appellant stated that he didn't have a land transfer back to him drafted immediately. This exchange followed:

Q. And if you acted and obtained a transfer back from your parents immediately after your parents had agreed to transfer the property back we wouldn't be here today would we Mr. DeGeer?

A. I don't know.

Q. We wouldn't be here today Mr. DeGeer because you do know that the superficial loss rules would have applied to you and the capital loss that you would have been seeking would have been reduced to nil by operation of the Income Tax Act. You knew that, didn't you Mr. DeGeer?

A. I know that now.

Q. You knew that at the time didn't you Mr. DeGeer?

A. No.

Q. Come now.

A. No, I did not.

Q. So it is pure coincidence, is it Mr. DeGeer, that the transfer back thirty-five days after the original transfer, being the first Saturday outside of the thirty day period prescribed by the superficial loss rules, well past the time when your mother had agreed to have it transferred back, was done purely by coincidence and without your knowledge and specific intention in regard to the Income Tax Act? Purely coincident, is that right Mr. DeGeer?

A. First of all, I don't know that it was well past. It was probably the first opportunity that I had to go up there.

Q. It was not on your ...

A. It was, the first opportunity I had to go up there because I would have attended to that right away. Now, unfortunately, counsel, it is the closeness to what turned out to be the thirty day rule that is the reason that we are here as expressed by Mr. Vantil's[4] comments to me on January 2, 1997.

Q. By the way ...

A. You guys are ticked it was so close and I'm sorry that was the first Saturday I was up with that Deed.

[38] The Appellant, in his 1993 income tax return, reported taxable capital gains of $238,357.47. This sum is 75 percent of the total of $127,500 from the sale of the capital interest of the aforesaid trust and capital gains of $190,309.97 from sale of Trimark shares, the total being $317,809. The Appellant claimed a capital loss carry forward from his 1992 taxation year of $238,357.47 to reduce his taxable capital gain in 1993 to nil.

[39] The Appellant reported taxable capital gains of $466,350.99 in his 1994 taxation year. This is 75 percent of the total capital gains of $235,000 from sale of the capital interest in the trust, capital gains of $291,699 from the disposition of 10,000 Trimark shares and an elected capital gain in the amount of $95,102.33, the total being $621,801. The Appellant claimed a capital gains deduction of $71,326.75 and a capital loss carry forward from his 1992 taxation year in the amount of $386,092.28.

[40] The Minister reassessed the Appellant disallowing the allowable capital loss claim in 1992, 1993 and 1994 and assessed penalties in respect of the claim of that amount.

APPELLANT'S SUBMISSIONS:

[41] The Appellant's submissions were almost entirely devoted to establishing that his transactions were not subject to the provisions of section 245, the General Anti-Avoidance Rule. Because I have determined that the purported transfer of the farm was invalid and legally ineffective, section 245 need not be considered.

[42] Respecting whether there was a "disposition" of the farm to his parents in August, 1992, the Appellant stated that the transaction was a valid disposition of land effected by the execution and delivery of prescribed Form I under the Ontario Land Registration Reform Act. He stated that that Deed purported to convey the "fee simple" which, under the Ontario Conveyancing and Law of Property Act conveys all of the transferor's interest in the subject land. He further stated that registration of a Deed was not required under the Registry system in order to effect a transfer. He referred to an act to amend the Land Transfer Tax Act[5]. It provided that "a disposition of a beneficial interest in land" included a sale, transfer or assignment, however effected, of any part of a beneficial interest in land. Section 2(a)(2) reads as follows:

If there is a disposition of a beneficial interest in land, tax at the rates otherwise determined under section 2 is payable to the Treasurer on the thirtieth day after the date of the disposition as if the disposition were a conveyance of land tendered for registration.

ANALYSIS AND CONCLUSION:

[43] Obviously, the Appellant's purpose in referring to these forms and provisions was to persuade the Court that the 1992 transfers were made in compliance with statutory requirements and were not required to be registered.

[44] Execution of forms of conveyance does not, of itself, effect a disposition of property. The Appellant's purported transfer to his parents on August 15, 1992 was not a "disposition" of property within the meaning of paragraph 40(1)(b) which describes:

a taxpayer's loss for a taxation year from the disposition of any property.

[45] The term "disposition", described in paragraph 54(c) is not a definition. It includes certain specific transactions and is, accordingly, not helpful in this situation. Obviously, disposition means parting, unconditionally, with beneficial ownership of property. The evidence does not support a conclusion that the Appellant unconditionally parted with beneficial ownership of the farm to his parents on August 15, 1992. The facts persuade me that the Appellant engineered the purported transfer in order to "trigger" a capital loss. This was followed thirty-five days later by a purported transfer from his parents to him with the intent that he would still own the farm, having reacquired same beyond the thirty day limit within which such reacquisition, if valid, would have resulted in his capital loss being deemed to be nil as a "superficial loss"[6].

[46] The Appellant's knowledge of the provisions and workings of the Act respecting transactions with his parents and Dina was, despite his protestations, extensive.

(a) He admitted knowledge of the fact that each parent could take advantage of a $500,000 capital gains exemption on the disposition of farm property. He acknowledged that the 1989 acquisition, while benefiting his parents and effecting an estate freeze, gave him a cost amount for tax purposes of that property equal to the sale price to his parents.

(b) The Appellant was aware, in early 1992, that his wife had shares which could produce a substantial capital gain and he prepared documents by virtue of which she held shares and options in his name for the purpose of him disposing of same and using the purported capital loss from the farm transactions and his capital gains exemption to reduce those gains for tax purposes.

(c) The Appellant used the term LCGE which indicated his knowledge of an acronym for Lifetime Capital Gains Exemption, underlining his familiarity with the Act and sing its provisions in planning.

(d) He was fully aware that, with respect to Trust Document No. 2, the cost base to Dina would be equal to her proceeds of disposition.

(e) The Appellant acknowledged that "triggering" a capital gain would be offset by the purported capital loss.

(f) The Appellant prepared a "roll-over" election form and readily referred to it in evidence as a T2059, thus indicating his degree of familiarity with and sophistication in the area of taxation.

(g) The Appellant was aware of the potential for restricted farm losses, which he claimed, resulting from entering into a partnership arrangement with his step-father.

[47] He described the terrible time he was having with Dina following the transfer of the farm to his parents on August 15, 1992. This domestic travail was said to have commenced very shortly after the transferring document was executed in spite of the fact that such document contained a consent to same executed by Dina. It is noted that Dina was not produced as a witness. It is further noted that although his mother testified briefly, his step-father was not produced as a witness. In O'Brien v. Her Majesty the Queen, [1988] 4 CTC 2772, Christie, J. said, at 2775:

With respect to the $10,000.00, again there is no convincing evidence establishing what part of it, if any, should be allowed. There are no documents in evidence about this and the appellant's wife was not called upon to testify. This omission was not explained. Had she testified, counsel for the respondent would have been able to cross-examine regarding precisely what services she rendered in the asserted capacity of independent contractor for the $10,000.00. Enns v. Minister of National Revenue (1987), 87 D.T.C. 208 (T.C.C.) involved the failure to call witnesses whose testimony in the opinion of the trial judge, Sarchuk, T.C.J., would have been of considerable assistance to the Court. In this regard His Honour said at page 210:

In The Law of Evidence in Civil Cases, by Sopinka and Lederman, the authors comment on the effect of failure to call a witness and I quote:

In Blatch v. Archer (1774), I Cowp. 63, at p. 65 Lord Mansfield stated:

It is certainly a maxim that all evidence is to be weighed according to the proof which it was in the power of one side to have produced, and in the power of the other to have contradicted.

The application of this maxim has led to a well-recognized rule that the failure of a party or a witness to give evidence, which it was in the power of the party or witness to give and by which the facts might have been elucidated, justified the Court in drawing the inference that the evidence of the party or witness would have been unfavourable to the party to whom the failure was attributed.

In the case of a plaintiff who has the evidentiary burden of establishing an issue, the effect of such an inference may be that the evidence led will be insufficient to discharge the burden. (Levésque v. Comeau, [1970] S.C.R. 1010, (1971). 16 D.L.R. (3d) 425) [emphasis added in the original text]

See also Markakis v. M.N.R., 86 DTC 1237 (TCC), Sedelnick Estate v. M.N.R., 86 DTC 1563(TCC) and Christensen v. The Queen, 98 DTC 1893.

[48] No explanation having been proffered respecting the failure to produce those two witnesses, but particularly, Dina, presents the obvious question as to the reason for such failure. The logical inferences are that they did not wish to testify and/or that the Appellant did not want them subjected to cross-examination.

[49] In light of the broad knowledge of tax matters brought to bear upon all of the transactions in which the Appellant was involved and which he orchestrated, his statement that he was unaware of the superficial loss rule of thirty days is not believable. Other factors underlining the fragility of the Appellant's capital loss claim are:

(1) The Appellant's stated ambition, upon learning that he would become a partner in a Toronto law firm, was to creditor-proof himself by conveying the farm to his parents and the other properties to his wife. When the Appellant was asked on examination for discovery about the reason for conveying the land to his parents he made no mention of creditor-proofing. The evidence is clear that the Muskoka property, owned since April, 1991, was not conveyed to his wife and the evidence is clear that the Etobicoke residence, owned since September, 1991, was not transferred to his wife. Further, at the time that he seemed so concerned with creditors he was beneficial owner of Trimark shares and options.

(2) In May, 1993 he gave his parents a charge on the farm equal to the value of the promissory note. A charge of that nature could have been made on the land at the time of initial acquisition from his parents and this would have left the land without value so far as some potential creditor was concerned.

(3) The Appellant dealt with the farm pursuant to his mother having stated that he could do "whatever you want to do".

(4) There was no reduction of any amount on account of the promissory note obligation on the purported transfer of the farm by the Appellant to his parents on August 15, 1992. That note remained valid and unchanged.

(5) In spite of the Appellant's firmly stated belief in creditor proofing he did not mention that on examination for discovery. Further, he did not convey any assets to Dina even though a substantial period of time had elapsed between the acquisition of those properties and his learning that he would not become a partner.

(6) The Appellant obtained no valuation of the farm on the initial acquisition from his parents.

(7) The Appellant obtained no valuation upon the purported transfer to his parents in August, 1992.

(8) The foregoing two amounts selected by him appear to be convenient for his purposes, no evidence regarding those amounts having been presented to the Court.

[50] Combined with all the foregoing factors is the Appellant's conduct during the hearing. His obdurate nature asserted itself with continued denial that the promissory note given to his parents payable, without interest, ten years after its delivery, had, in fact, a value equal to the promissory note amount. That position which is patently absurd fuels a challenge of his credibility. His responses, on cross-examination, became increasingly vague and sarcastic in respect of questions with which he was obviously uncomfortable.

[51] These factors have let me to the conclusion, that the Appellant set up the circumstances around the transfer of land to his parents so that a capital loss to be applied in reduction of expected capital gains would arise. The timing of the transactions connected with the purported sale support that conclusion. There was, in my opinion, no intention of parting unconditionally with beneficial interest in the farm and hence no disposition of the farm on August 15, 1992 by the Appellant to his parents. Accordingly, no capital loss arises therefrom.

[52] Every person who, knowingly has made a false statement in a return file as required by the Act is liable to a penalty under subsection 163(2) as computed therein. The Appellant was so required. He, knowingly, having made invalid deduction claims in respect of a capital loss, is subject to the penalties assessed.

[53] The Appellant's appeals from the reassessments made under the Act for the 1993 and 1994 taxation years are dismissed and the penalties are affirmed as properly assessed.

[54] The purported appeal from the reassessment made under the Act for the 1992 taxation year is quashed.

[55] Costs are awarded to the Respondent.

Signed at Ottawa, this 16th day of December, 1999.

"R.D. Bell"

J.T.C.C.

[1] Notices of Objection for 1993 and 1994 were contained in the Appellant's Book of Documents but no Notice of Objection for 1992 is included in those documents.

[2] He attempted to give evidence himself on valuation but was not permitted to do so because he is not an expert in that field. In any event, the General Procedure Rules require the filing of an expert report in advance of the hearing.

[3] The Charge/Mortgage of Land described in the following paragraph.

[4] Auditor with Revenue Canada.

[5] Assented to on December 19, 1989.

[6] Subparagraph 40(2)(g)(i) provides that a taxpayer's loss from the disposition of property to the extent that it is a superficial loss is nil. The definition of superficial loss in paragraph 54(i) includes the loss from disposition of property where the same property was acquired within thirty days after disposition of same.

