Docket: 2004-4446(IT)G

BETWEEN:

Heritage education funds inc.,

Appellant,

and

HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN,

Respondent.

ORDER as to costs

The appellant is entitled to its costs in the usual amount under Tariff B of Schedule II of the Tax Court of Canada Rules (General Procedure), in accordance with the Reasons for order as to costs attached thereto.

Signed at Montréal, Quebec, this 21st day of May 2010.

“Lucie Lamarre”

Lamarre J.

Citation: 2010 TCC 286

Date: 20100521

Docket: 2004-4446(IT)G

BETWEEN:

HERITAGE EDUCATION FUNDS INC.,

Appellant,

and

HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN,

Respondent.

REASONS FOR ORDER AS TO COSTS

Lamarre J.

[1] The appellant has requested that it be awarded costs in the usual amount under Tariff B of Schedule II (Tariff B) of the Tax Court of Canada Rules (General Procedure) (Rules) on the basis that the appeal was allowed in full.

[2] The respondent submitted that the parties should each bear their own costs on the basis that 1) the appellant was successful in its appeal for reasons other than those advanced in its pleadings, and 2) a settlement offer dated February 11, 2008, which was made to the appellant, would have provided the same relief for the year under appeal (1999) as was ultimately ordered by the Court, but that offer was rejected by the appellant. According to the respondent, the settlement offer made provision for refiling and reassessment for years subsequent to 1999 in accordance with what the Court determined to be the appropriate principles.

[3] The appellant replied that 1) the basis of the judgment should have no bearing on the issue of costs, and 2) the respondent’s offer would not have provided a result equivalent to that obtained at trial. On this point, the appellant stated that its financial advisers concluded that the respondent’s offer would have resulted in substantial additional tax liability in taxation years after 1999. The appellant also submitted that it itself had made a written offer of settlement on August 7, 2007, which was rejected by the respondent. According to the appellant, that offer of settlement was more favourable to the respondent than the result ultimately obtained at trial.

[4] I arranged for a conference call, which was held on May 13, 2010, to ask counsel to clarify their positions. Counsel for the appellant explained that under the respondent’s offer the respondent would abandon the 1999 reassessment that was in issue before me, but the appellant would have had to agree not only to include in income for subsequent years, on an accrual basis, the enrolment fees earned but also to include all payments received in respect of sales made prior to 2000, as and when those payments were received.

[5] With respect to its settlement offer of August 7, 2007, the appellant was of the view that it was more favourable to the respondent than the result ultimately obtained at trial. In its offer, the appellant proposed that the enrolment fees not be included in income within the first 60 days following the sale of a scholarship agreement (during which period a member joining the plan could withdraw from the plan and receive a refund of the enrolment fees). The appellant also proposed that after that 60-day period the enrolment fees be included in income, subject to a deduction for a doubtful debt reserve or a deduction for bad debt. During the conference call, counsel for the appellant explained that as a result of that offer the appellant would have immediately brought into income for the year 1999 an amount greater than what the respondent ultimately got at trial, which was nothing.

[6] Counsel for the respondent simply stated during the conference call that the position taken by the appellant in its settlement offer did not prevail at trial. As for the respondent’s offer to settle, counsel for the respondent said that he was not submitting that the respondent obtained a more favourable result at trial than she would have under that offer.

[7] Although I agree with counsel for the respondent that my decision, if it is not appealed, will have an impact on years subsequent to 1999 that are not statute-barred, I also agree with counsel for the appellant that the settlement offer made by the respondent was not exactly in line with the result obtained at trial. Furthermore, I do not see what authority the respondent has to include in income payments received in respect of sales made prior to 2000 as and when those payments are received (if my decision is not appealed), when the appellant has to report its income on an accrual basis.

[8] With respect to the appellant’s offer, I do agree with counsel for the respondent that the appellant’s position did not prevail at trial. I held that the enrolment fees must be included in income when earned, that is, when the scholarship agreements are sold. With respect to the initial 60-day period, I made no distinction of the kind proposed by the appellant in its settlement offer. I am of the view that that proposal was not more favourable to the respondent, except for the fact that the appeal was ultimately allowed on the basis that the enrolment fees earned prior to 1999 should not have been included in income.

[9] With respect to the respondent’s first argument that the appellant was successful in its appeal for reasons other than those advanced in its pleadings, I do not exactly come to that conclusion in my reasons for judgment. I therefore agree with counsel for the appellant that this point has no bearing on the issue of costs.

[10] All in all, I find that the appellant is entitled to its costs in the usual amount under Tariff B of Schedule II of the Rules.

Signed at Montréal, Quebec, this 21st day of May 2010.

“Lucie Lamarre”

Lamarre J.

CITATION: 2010 TCC 286

COURT FILE NO.: 2004-4446(IT)G

STYLE OF CAUSE: Heritage education funds inc. v. THE QUEEN

PLACE OF HEARING: Ottawa, Ontario



DATE OF HEARING: May 13, 2010

REASONS FOR ORDER BY: The Honourable Justice Lucie Lamarre

DATE OF ORDER: May 21, 2010

APPEARANCES:

Counsel for the Appellant:

William Innes

Counsel for the Respondent:

Eric Noble

COUNSEL OF RECORD:

For the Appellant:

Name: William Innes

Firm: Fraser Milner Casgrain LLP

For the Respondent: Myles J. Kirvan

Deputy Attorney General of Canada

Ottawa, Canada

