[OFFICIAL ENGLISH TRANSLATION]

2001-3847(IT)I

BETWEEN:

RODRIGUE JONCAS,

Appellant,

and

HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN,

Respondent.

Appeals heard on May 29, 2002, at Matane, Quebec, by

The Honourable Judge François Angers

Appearances

For the Appellant: The Appellant himself

Counsel for the Respondent: Stéphanie Côté

JUDGMENT

The appeals from the assessments made under the Income Tax Act for the 1998 and 1999 taxation years are dismissed, in accordance with the attached Reasons for Judgment.

Signed at Edmundston, New Brunswick, this 14th day of August 2002.

"François Angers"

J.T.C.C.

Translation certified true

on this 13th day of November 2003.

Sophie Debbané, Revisor

[OFFICIAL ENGLISH TRANSLATION]

Date: 20020814

Docket: 2001-3847(IT)I

BETWEEN:

RODRIGUE JONCAS,

Appellant,

and

HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN,

Respondent.

REASONS FOR JUDGMENT

Angers, J.T.C.C.

[1] These appeals were heard under the informal procedure at Matane, Quebec, on May 29, 2002. In a Notice of Reassessment dated November 14, 2000, the Minister of National Revenue ("the Minister") disallowed the amounts of $4,800 and of $5,300 that the appellant paid as support and claimed as deductions for the 1998 and 1999 taxation years respectively. The Minister also disallowed the amount of $5,617 claimed as a deduction for employment expenses for the 1999 taxation year.

[2] At the beginning of the hearing, the appellant abandoned his appeal from the Minister's decision to disallow the amount claimed as a deduction for employment expenses. Thus the appeals deal solely with whether the support is deductible for the 1998 and 1999 taxation years.

[3] In making these reassessments for the taxation years at issue, the Minister relied on the following assumptions of fact, all of which were admitted by the appellant:

[TRANSLATION]

(a) on August 26, 1972, the appellant and Henriette Doyon ("the former spouse") were married;

(b) from their union was born a daughter, Magalie ("the daughter");

(c) the appellant's daughter was born on August 27, 1977;

(d) by means of a decree nisi signed by the Honourable Judge Robert Lesage of the Quebec Superior Court on December 5, 1983, and ratifying an agreement signed by the appellant and the appellant's former spouse on November 14, 1983, concerning corollary relief and the liquidation of the matrimonial regime:

(i) the applicant's former spouse shall have legal custody of the minor child Magalie;

(ii) the applicant shall pay his former spouse in advance, on the first day of each month, at the former spouse's home, support in the amount of $300 per month for the minor child Magalie;

(e) the appellant's daughter reached the age of 18 years on August 27, 1995;

(f) during the 1998 and 1999 taxation years, the appellant's daughter was a student at Université de Montréal;

(g) for the 1998 and 1999 taxation years, the appellant paid the amounts at issue directly to his daughter;

(h) the Minister disallowed amounts of $4,800 and $5,300 claimed by the appellant as deductions for support for the 1998 and 1999 taxation years respectively.

[4] The Minister admitted the truth of the assumptions of fact set out in subparagraph (g) and acknowledged that the support paid directly to the appellant's daughter was paid with the consent of the appellant's former spouse. Apparently these payments began when the daughter was a student at a CÉGEP in Montréal and her mother was living in Mont-Louis. At that time, the daughter was 17½ years old. According to the appellant, he was given this consent because he did not always pay the support on time. The December 5, 1983, decree nisi referred to in subparagraph (d) above was never varied. The appellant stated that his former spouse always managed the money from the daughter's loans and scholarships even though the daughter was studying in Montréal.

[5] The relevant provisions of the Income Tax Act ("the Act") are found in sections 56.1, 60 and 60.1. Section 56.1, amended in 1997, applies to amounts paid after 1996. Subsection 56.1(4) was added in 1997; it sets out the following definitions:

"support amount" means an amount payable or receivable as an allowance on a periodic basis for the maintenance of the recipient, children of the recipient or both the recipient and children of the recipient, if the recipient has discretion as to the use of the amount, and

(a) the recipient is the spouse or former spouse of the payer, the recipient and payer are living separate and apart because of the breakdown of their marriage and the amount is receivable under an order of a competent tribunal or under a written agreement; or

(b) the payer is a natural parent of a child of the recipient and the amount is receivable under an order made by a competent tribunal in accordance with the laws of a province.

"child support amount" means any support amount that is not identified in the agreement or order under which it is receivable as being solely for the support of a recipient who is a spouse or former spouse of the payer or who is a parent of a child of whom the payer is a natural parent.

[6] In 1997, paragraph 60(b) was amended. This paragraph applies to amounts paid after 1996 and reads as follows:

Section 60: Other Deductions.

There may be deducted in computing a taxpayer's income for a taxation year such of the following amounts as are applicable:

...

(b) Support - the total of all amounts each of which is an amount determined by the formula

A - (B + C)

where

A is the total of all amounts each of which is a support amount paid after 1996 and before the end of the year by the taxpayer to a particular person, where the taxpayer and the particular person were living separate and apart at the time the amount was paid,

B is the total of all amounts each of which is a child support amount that became payable by the taxpayer to the particular person under an agreement or order on or after its commencement day and before the end of the year in respect of a period that began on or after its commencement day, and

C is the total of all amounts each of which is a support amount paid by the taxpayer to the particular person after 1996 and deductible in computing the taxpayer's income for a preceding taxation year;

Subsection 60.1(1) reads as follows:

Section 60.1: Support.

(1) For the purposes of paragraph 60(b) and subsection 118(5), where an order or agreement, or any variation thereof, provides for the payment of an amount by a taxpayer to a person or for the benefit of the person, children in the person's custody or both the person and those children, the amount or any part thereof

(a) when payable, is deemed to be payable to and receivable by that person; and

(b) when paid, is deemed to have been paid to and received by that person.

[7] The appellant's position is relatively simple. He considers that he meets the requirements set out in subsection 60.1(1) of the Act, in that the December 5, 1983, decree nisi giving custody of the minor child to his former spouse is still valid. He argued that the reason his daughter no longer lives with her mother is that the daughter lives in Montréal in order to pursue her studies. That is one drawback of living in a rural area. Although no evidence on this point was adduced at the hearing, the appellant stated that his daughter never withdrew from her mother's authority. He concluded by stating that his former spouse consented to having the support paid directly to the daughter and that this consent constitutes an agreement.

[8] In the respondent's view, section 60.1(1) of the Act provides that only an amount paid by a taxpayer to a person for children in that person's custody under an order or an agreement is deductible under paragraph 60(b). It is clear that, under the Civil code of Québec, when a child reaches the age of 18 years, the parents' right of custody is extinguished. In support of her position, the respondent cited the decision in Curzi v. Canada (Minister of National Revenue - M.N.R.), [1994] F.C.J. No. 154, itself citing and endorsing a January 8, 1991, decision by this Court in Guardo v. Minister of National Revenue (89-1660(IT)). In Curzi, at paragraphs 13 to 20, Noël J. considered the concept of "custody" in relation to the concept of "child of the marriage" as defined in the Divorce Act as follows:

13. With due respect for the opinion so expressed, I find that it confuses the right of custody set out in the Divorce Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. 3 (2nd Supp.), with the concept of "child of the marriage" which is also set out therein. First, I note that the section cited by the trial judge as governing the duration of custody in fact relates to the definition of the expression "child of the marriage".

14. That expression is defined in section 2(1) as follows:

"child of the marriage" means a child of two spouses or former spouses who, at the material time,

(a) is under the age of sixteen years, or

(b) is sixteen years of age or over and under their charge but unable, by reason of illness, disability or other cause, to withdraw from their charge or to obtain the necessaries of life.

15. The word "garde" is also defined in the same section, as follows:

"garde" Sont assimilés à la garde le soin, l'éducation et tout autre élément qui s'y rattache.

16. The English version of the word "garde" is the word "custody", which is defined as follows:

"custody" includes care, upbringing and any other incident of custody.

17. Some aspects of the definition of the expression "child of the marriage" set out in the Divorce Act evoke a concept similar to the one contemplated by the support obligation set out in the Civil Code: a child may be considered to be under the charge of his or her parents for so long as he or she cannot provide for his or her own needs, regardless of age.

18. The concept of "garde" or "custody" evokes quite another thing. In a divorce, either of the former spouses may be granted custody of the children. A custody order confers a right on the parent who is granted custody. It is the parent who has custody of the children who has ultimate responsibility for the upbringing [See Note 2 below] of the children and for exercising parental authority. On the other hand, a custody order carries with it all of the duties attaching to custody.

_______________________________________________________

Note 2: I note that the word "éducation" in the definition of the word "garde" is used in its broad sense. It is equivalent to the expression "upbringing" which is used in the English version.

_____________________________________________________

19. However, the right of custody is not perpetual and a custody order could not be set up against an emancipated adult child who voluntarily chooses to withdraw from parental authority. The fact that a child may, in such circumstances, still be a child of the marriage because, having left the parental home, he or she cannot provide for his or her own needs does not mean that the child remains in the custody of the parent whom he or she has chosen to leave. It is a prerequisite to the concept of custody that there be parental authority, which cannot be exercised over an emancipated adult child who chooses to withdraw from that authority. The trial judge could therefore not conclude that Stéphane was still in the custody of his mother solely on the ground that he was in need after leaving his mother's home or that the custody order made in 1977 had not, at the time in question, formally been revoked.

20. In my view, the purpose of subsection 60.1(1) is to allow the deduction of amounts paid for the benefit of a child as long as the child is still in the custody of the former spouse or the former spouse remains under the duty of care which attaches to custody. When a child is emancipated and leaves the custody of the spouse, the problem addressed by Parliament in allowing the deduction of amounts paid for the benefit of the child ceases to exist: from that point on, the former spouse no longer has a duty of care deriving from his or her right of custody, and the support can no longer be considered to be owing or paid on account of that duty.

[9] It is also worth noting a decision rendered by our Court on the issue of the right to custody, particularly in light of the provisions of the Civil code of Québec. In dismissing the appeal in Guardo, Judge Lamarre Proulx wrote as follows:

The obligation to support relatives in the direct line is set out in Article 633 of the Civil Code of Québec:

633. Spouses, and relatives in the direct line, owe each other support.

Proceedings for support are instituted by the holder of parental authority in the case of a minor child:

634. Proceedings for the support of a minor child may be instituted by the holder of parental authority, his tutor, or any person who has custody of him, according to the circumstances.

The court may order the support payable to the person who has custody of the child.

In the case at bar, the adult child himself instituted proceedings against his father. The judgments filed by the appellant, Exhibits A-1 and A-2 , are in the nature of support orders, and neither of these judgments indicates that anyone has custody of the child. Under both the Divorce Act and the provisions of the Civil Code of Québec, an adult child may obtain a support order.

The Divorce Act provides that a custody order may be made. No order was filed. We must therefore refer to the provisions of the Civil Code of Québec and determine whether it may be said that the appellant's ex-wife had custody of his child. It is clear, upon reading the provisions of the Civil Code, that the right to custody of the child is extinguished when the child attains the age of majority, which is fixed at 18 years in Québec, and that the right to custody can be exercised only with respect to a minor child.

324. Majority is fixed at the complete age of eighteen years. At that age persons are capable of performing all civil acts.

In the case of adult children, there are schemes for the protection of adults, but this is not the situation in this case.

Article 646 of the Civil Code of Québec reads as follows:

646.A child remains subject to the authority of his father and mother until his majority or emancipation.

Article 650 of the Civil Code of Québec reads as follows:

650. No unemancipated minor may leave the family home without the consent of the person having parental authority.

An adult child may voluntarily remain in the home of one of his parents, but they cannot exercise any right of custody, because such a child may live where he wishes. However, he retains a right to support if he needs it.

It is clear that under the provisions of the Civil Code the parents' right of custody is extinguished when their children reach the age of majority. The appellant's ex-wife did not have custody of his son Laurent and accordingly the provisions of subsection 60.1(1) of the Act cannot apply.

[10] In light of the evidence adduced, at issue in the present case is whether, during the taxation years at issue, the appellant's former spouse was still obliged to take care of the child under a custody order; whether the child was subject to parental authority; and whether the mother had custody of the child.

[11] In his testimony, the appellant stated that, even though the child is studying in Montréal and no longer lives with her mother, the mother still manages the money from the loans and scholarships for the child. The evidence showed that during the same period the appellant began to pay the support provided for in the decree nisi directly to the child, then aged 17½ years, because he did not always pay the support to his former spouse on time. How is it possible for the appellant's former spouse to manage some of the child's money, while at the same time giving the child responsibility for collecting the support to which she is entitled under the decree nisi? The appellant provided no explanation for the fact that the support paid during the two taxation years at issue was higher than the amount stated in the December 5, 1983, decree nisi. The Court concludes that this decree nisi was no longer applicable during the taxation years at issue. The child had reached the age of majority, and the appellant's former spouse gave the daughter responsibility for managing the money paid by the appellant, thereby withdrawing from her obligation of care usually associated with a custody order.

[12] Therefore, we have in this case an intelligent, emancipated young woman who has reached the age of majority, is studying at university, and is capable of managing her money. In the Court's view, during the taxation years at issue, the daughter did not feel subject to her mother's parental authority. The Court finds that there was no longer a custody order as such. If the Court now applies the principles stated in Guardo, that is, that parents' right of custody is extinguished when a child reaches the age of majority, the Court finds that during the taxation years at issue, the appellant's former spouse no longer had the right of custody with respect to this child.

[13] In Robinson v. Canada, [2000] T.C.J. No. 477 (Q.L.), Judge Rip expressed his views on the concept of "custody" at paragraph 16, as follows:

Custody implies that the child submit himself or herself to parental control and is dependent to a certain extent. This is a determination that must be made on the facts and is not necessarily dependent upon age, although an adult child has a greater onus than a minor does to prove that he or she is under the custody of a parent.

[14] According to the evidence adduced, the amounts paid by the appellant as support during the taxation years at issue are not deductible because they were not paid for a child who was in the custody of the former spouse as provided for in paragraph 60(b) and in section 60.1 of the Act. The appeals are therefore dismissed.

Signed at Edmundston, New Brunswick, this 14th day of August 2002.

"François Angers"

J.T.C.C.

Translation certified true

on this 13th day of November 2003.

Sophie Debbané, Revisor

